Update episode "Configuration" for v2.14.0 (#408)
ESMValGroup/ESMValTool_Tutorial: _episodes/03-configuration.md

---
title: "Configuration"
teaching: 10
exercises: 15
compatibility: ESMValTool v2.14.0

questions:
- What is the user configuration file and how should I use it?

objectives:
- Understand the contents of the ``config-user.yml`` file

> - Prepare a personalized ``config-user.yml`` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Understand how ESMValTool is configured
- Prepare a personalized ESMValTool configuration
```

- Configure ESMValTool to use stored climate data and to download climate data

keypoints:
- The ``config-user.yml`` sets basic configurations for ESMValTool.
- There are specific configuration files to find stored climate data.

> - ESMvalTool can download automatically climate data from ESGF, therefore specific configurations are needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ESMValTool can be configured through YAML files located in `~/.config/esmvaltool` or command line arguments
- The final configuration is created by merging the contents of all YAML files and command line arguments
- Users can choose to use one big configuration file, or spread its contents among many small configuration files
- ESMValTool can be configured to automatically download climate data from ESGF
```

---

> ## The configuration file 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuring ESMValTool via YAML files
```

ESMValTool provides a list of default configuration files, e.g. 
the ``config-user.yml`` configuration file contains all the global level

> information needed by ESMValTool to run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ESMValTool provides a set of predefined configuration files.
These include the files specifying the default configuration values,
but also machine-specific files that include data sources for various
HPC systems.

To show all available files, run

~~~bash
esmvaltool config list
~~~

```

All configuration files are [YAML files](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html).

If you need to update the configuration files for your own system, you need to 
copy them in your own configurtaion directory (`~/.config/esmvaltool/config-user.yml`).

> You can get the default configuration file by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To customize your configuration vie YAML files, you can copy one of the existing files.
For example, to copy the file containing the default values for many options, run
```

> and then <kbd>ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>X</kbd> to exit ``nano``.
{: .callout}

## Destination directory

The configuration file starts with setting the destination directory, which is 

> the rootpath where ESMValTool will store its output folders containing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example configuration file contains the option ``output_dir``, which is
the rootpath where ESMValTool will store its output folders containing
```

> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

## Output settings

Additionally you can configure the output settings that
inform ESMValTool about your preference for output.
You can turn on or off the setting by ``true`` or ``false``

> values. Most of these settings are fairly self-explanatory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of these settings are fairly self-explanatory.
```

There are settings that are not true/false like `output_file_type`.

> ## Saving preprocessed data
>
> Later in this tutorial, we will want to look at the contents of the
> `preproc` folder.
> This folder contains preprocessed data and is removed by default when
> ESMValTool is run.
> In the configuration file, which settings can be modified to prevent

> > this from happening?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In the configuration, which settings can be modified to prevent
> this from happening?
```

amount of memory available in your system.
{: .callout}

> ## Make your own configuration file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Customizing your configuration
```

> 
> Configuration files could live in the user configuration directory, which is 
> by default ``~/.config/esmvaltool``. The directory could be also specified
> via the command line argument ``--config_dir`` or can be changed with the 
> ESMVALTOOL_CONFIG_DIR environment variable.
> We will learn how to do this in the
> [next lesson]({{ page.root }}{% link _episodes/04-recipe.md %}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

By default, configuration files are read from the directory ``~/.config/esmvaltool``.
This can be changed via the ``ESMVALTOOL_CONFIG_DIR`` environment variable.
In addition another custom configuration directory can be specified via the
``--config_dir`` command line argument.
We will learn how to do this in the
[next lesson]({{ page.root }}{% link _episodes/04-recipe.md %}).
```

It is possible to have several configuration files with different purposes,

> for example: config-user_formalised_runs.yml, config-user_debugging.yml.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for example: ``dask_options.yml``, ``data_sources.yml``.
```

In this case, ESMValTool searches for all YAML files within each of the 
configuration directories and merges them together. How this is done is 
explained [here](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/

> latest/quickstart/configure.html#yaml-files).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
latest/quickstart/configure.html#yaml-files).

To show the final configuration that is actually used when running ESMValTool, you can use

~~~bash
esmvaltool config show
~~~
```

## Rootpath to input data

> ESMValTool uses several categories (in ESMValTool, this is referred to as projects)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ESMValTool uses several categories (in ESMValTool, these are referred to as projects)
```

for input data based on their source (e.g.
CMIP6, CMIP5, obs4mips, OBS6, OBS). For example, CMIP is used for a dataset from
the Climate Model Intercomparison Project whereas OBS may be 
used for an observational dataset.
More information about the projects used in ESMValTool is available in the 
[documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/esmvalcore/en/latest/
quickstart/find_data.html). The ``data`` section for each project in the configuration 
files defines sources of input data. The easiest way to get started with these is to 
copy one of the example configuration files and tailor it to your needs.

When using ESMValTool on your own machine, the recommended setup can 
be obtained by running the command

~~~bash
  esmvaltool config copy data-local-esmvaltool.yml
~~~

After the default file "data-local-esmvaltool.yml" is copied in your configuration
folder `~/.config/esmvaltool/config-user.yml` you can update the `rootpath` and the
`dirname_template` to match your file locations. The ``rootpath`` specifies the 
directories where ESMValTool will look for input data of the specific project. The

> `dirname_template` setting describes the file structure for each project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the file ``data-local-esmvaltool.yml`` has been copied to your configuration
directory `~/.config/esmvaltool/`, you can update the `rootpath` and the
`dirname_template` to match your file locations. The ``rootpath`` specifies the 
directories where ESMValTool will look for input data of the specific project. The
`dirname_template` setting describes the file structure for each project.
```

If you are working on a HPC system there are also  several example configurations 
for popular HPC systems, .e.g. JASMIN/DKRZ/ETH/IPSL. To list the available example 

> files, run the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are working on a HPC system, there are also several configurations 
for popular HPC systems, e. g. JASMIN, DKRZ, ETH, and IPSL. To list the available example 
files, run the command:
```

~~~bash
  esmvaltool config list data-hpc
~~~

> To load the suitable configuration file for the HPC system at DKRZ you can type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To load the configuration suitable for the HPC system at DKRZ, run:
```

~~~bash
  esmvaltool config copy data-hpc-dkrz.yml
~~~

It is also possible to ask ESMValTool to download climate model data as needed. When

> running `ESMValTool` you can automatically download the files required to run a recipe 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
running ESMValTool you can automatically download the files required to run a recipe 
```

from ESGF for the projects CMIP3, CMIP5, CMIP6, CORDEX, and obs4MIPs. Therefore

> we need to copy the appropriate configuration file in the default configuration folder:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from ESGF for the projects CMIP3, CMIP5, CMIP6, CORDEX, and obs4MIPs. For this,
copy the appropriate configuration file by running
```

~~~bash
  esmvaltool config copy data-intake-esgf.yml
~~~

Additionally we need to configure [intake-esgf]
(https://intake-esgf.readthedocs.io/en/stable/configure.html).
This can be done by specifying a download directory in the intake-esgf configure file, 
which is by default `~/.esgf`. Therefor copy the conf.yaml file in the 
`~/.config/intake-esgf` folder and replace the default under `local_cache:` and add 

> this download folder also under `esg_dataroot:`. The uodated file should 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, it is necessary to configure [intake-esgf]
(https://intake-esgf.readthedocs.io/en/stable/configure.html).
This can be done by updating the `local_cache` and  `esg_dataroot`
with your desired download directory in your
intake-esgf configuration file located at `~/.config/intake-esgf/conf.yaml`.
The updated file should look like this:
```

> look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - /glade/campaign/collections/cmip.mirror
> globus_indices:
>   ESGF2-US-1.5-Catalog: true
>   anl-dev: false
>   ornl-dev: false
> local_cache:
> - <your_download_dir>
> logfile: ~/.config/intake-esgf/esgf.log
> num_threads: 6
> print_log_on_error: false
> requests_cache:
>   cache_name: intake-esgf/requests-cache.sqlite
>   expire_after: 3600
>   use_cache_dir: true
> slow_download_threshold: 0.5
> solr_indices:
>   esg-dn1.nsc.liu.se: false
>   esgf-data.dkrz.de: false
>   esgf-node.ipsl.upmc.fr: false
>   esgf-node.llnl.gov: false
>   esgf-node.ornl.gov: false
>   esgf.ceda.ac.uk: false
>   esgf.nci.org.au: false
> stac_indices:
>   api.stac.ceda.ac.uk: false
> ```
>
{: .solution}

> ## Set the correct rootpaths
>
> In this tutorial, we will work with data from
> [CMIP5](https://esgf-node.llnl.gov/projects/cmip5/)
> and [CMIP6](https://esgf-node.llnl.gov/projects/cmip6).
> How can we modify the `rootpath` to make sure the data path is set correctly
> for both CMIP5 and CMIP6? 
> Note:
> to get the data, check the instructions in
> [Setup]({{ page.root }}{% link setup.md %}).
>
>> ## Solution
>>
>> - Are you working on your own local machine?

> >>   You need to copy teh `data-local-esmvaltool.yml` into your config directory 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>   You need to copy `data-local-esmvaltool.yml` into your configuration directory 
```

> >>   and add the root path of the folder where the data is available (e.g., ``<your_climate_data_dir>``) as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>   and specify the root path of the folder where the data is available (e.g., ``<your_climate_data_dir>``) as:
```

>>           filename_template: "{short_name}_{mip}_{dataset}_{exp}_{ensemble}_{grid}*.nc"
>>         esgf-cache:
>>           type: esmvalcore.io.local.LocalDataSource
>>           rootpath: <your_download_dir>
>>           dirname_template: "{project}/{activity}/{institute}/{dataset}/{exp}/{ensemble}/{mip}/{short_name}/{grid}/{version}"
>>           filename_template: "{short_name}_{mip}_{dataset}_{exp}_{ensemble}_{grid}*.nc"
>>     CMIP5:
>>       data:
>>         local:
>>           type: esmvalcore.io.local.LocalDataSource
>>           rootpath: <your_climate_data_dir>
>>           dirname_template: "{project.lower}/{product}/{institute}/{dataset}/{exp}/{frequency}/{modeling_realm}/{mip}/{ensemble}/{version}/{short_name}"
>>           filename_template: "{short_name}_{mip}_{dataset}_{exp}_{ensemble}*.nc"
>>         esgf-cache:
>>           type: esmvalcore.io.local.LocalDataSource
>>           rootpath: <your_download_dir>
>>           dirname_template: "{project.lower}/{product}/{institute}/{dataset}/{exp}/{frequency}/{modeling_realm}/{mip}/{ensemble}/{version}"
>>           filename_template: "{short_name}_{mip}_{dataset}_{exp}_{ensemble}*.nc"

> >>```

Reviewer: I am not sure if this is needed. The intake configuration you show above will also look in this path.

>>
>> - Are you working on a computer cluster like Jasmin or DKRZ?
>>   Site-specific path to the data for JASMIN/DKRZ/ETH/IPSL 
>>   are already available in specific configuration files. You 
>>   need to copy this file in your configuration directory.

> >>   For example, on DKRZ:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>   For example, on DKRZ, run:
```
